Preface {#preface .unnumbered}
=======

The activities in this collection have been designed for implementing
Process Oriented Guided Inquiry Learning (POGIL) in Computer Science.
POGIL is an evidence-based instructional strategy that helps students to
construct their own knowledge and develop process skills. The activities
generally follow a learning cycle of exploration, concept invention /
term introduction, and application. Students work in small teams of 3-4
to discuss each model and answer the questions during class time. The
instructor facilitates the process, creates opportunities for teams to
report out, and offers additional guidance as needed. See
<https://pogil.org/> for more information about POGIL and its
effectiveness.

Students typically work together in the same team for multiple class
periods (e.g., for an entire unit of the course). Each student should
have an assigned role on the team, and the roles should rotate
frequently (e.g, each week of the course). The *Manager* (or
Coordinator) keeps track of time and helps the team to stay on task. The
*Presenter* (or Spokesperson) speaks on behalf of the team when
reporting out. The *Recorder* (or Quality Control) reviews notes and
helps the team reach consensus. The *Reflector* (or Process Analyst)
observes and comments on team dynamics. By taking on different roles at
different times, more students have the opportunity to practice these
skills.

Before each activity, the instructor should spend a minute or two
providing context for how the topics relate to what was learned in
previous classes. While students work, the instructor should circulate
among the teams to monitor progress and provide assistance. Student
teams should employ the instructor as a facilitator of learning rather
than a source of information. The instructor should avoid giving or
confirming answers to key questions. Teams should be invited
periodically to report out to the whole class or to neighboring teams.
It's unnecessary to report out every question.

Students should not view these activities as assignments to be completed
individually. Rather, they are scripts that guide team discussion and
inquiry during class time. Implementing the activities in this way is
essential for students to develop process skills such as teamwork,
critical thinking, problem solving, and interpersonal communication.
Instructors should motivate students to capture key insights from the
team discussion and not just passively write down answers to questions.
The activity sheets are the student's notes for the day and should help
them when studying for exams.

At the end of each activity, students should complete some type of
assessment to demonstrate content knowledge and process skills. A
generic *Team Report* is included with this collection. Chapter 10 of
the POGIL book
(<https://pogil.org/curricular-materials/general-pogil-book>) has many
additional suggestions for assessment. Instructors might also use
prompts from the *Instructor's Guide to POGIL* (pages 40--42 of
<https://pcrest.com/research/POGIL_Instructor_Guide2014.pdf>). For more
in-depth assessment of process skills, the ELIPSS project has rubrics
(<https://elipss.com/process-skills.html>) that can be used both inside
and outside of class.

If you have any feedback regarding these activities, please don't
hesitate to contact me. I would love to hear how they worked in your
classroom and am constantly looking for new ways to improve them.

Chris Mayfield \<<mayfiecs@jmu.edu>\>
